README.md, before:

# supreme-goggles

This project aims to provide a Kubernetes controller to automate approval of signing requests for Kubelet serving certificates.

For why you'd want this, see documentation here:
- https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/kubelet-tls-bootstrapping/#client-and-serving-certificates
- https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tls/managing-tls-in-a-cluster/#sign-the-certificate-signing-request
- https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/certificate-signing-requests/#approval-rejection-api-client

Client certificates for kubelet have a fully automated controller, but serving certs do not.

## Prerequisites 

This requires kubelet to run with `--rotate-server-certificates=true`, (currently not set on AKS, for example).

Setting this and restarting kubelet is relatively non disruptive -- you can even delete the serving cert entirely with minimal disruption. Test this in your environment before relying on it in production!


## Caveats

Currently there's only a basic binary build and no container image or Kubernetes manifests. If you've done this thing before, feel free to send a pull request.

There are also no tests. We could use some!


## Build + Run

We currently use bazel for builds. If you've never used bazel, try [bazelisk](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazelisk).
It has one dependency, Go.

Install Go
```sh
GOLANG_VERSION="go1.19.2"
# adjust below as appropriate for os/arch, assuming you have bash.
curl -O "https://dl.google.com/go/${GOLANG_VERSION}.linux-amd64.tar.gz"

echo "unpacking go"
# these command may require sudo!
mkdir -p /usr/local/go
chown -R "$(whoami):$(whoami)" /usr/local/go 
tar -xvf "${GOLANG_VERSION}.linux-amd64.tar.gz" -C /usr/local
rm "${GOLANG_VERSION}.linux-amd64.tar.gz"
```

Install bazelisk
```sh
go install github.com/bazelbuild/bazelisk@latest
export PATH=$PATH:$(go env GOPATH)/bin
# rename to bazel for convenience, it will invoke as bazel of an arbitrary version
mv $(go env GOPATH)/bin/bazelisk $(go env GOPATH)/bin/bazel 
```

Simple build
```sh
bazel build supreme-goggles
```

Update dependencies after development
```sh
go mod tidy
bazel run gazelle # generate build files
bazel run gazelle-update-repos # generate repository rules for go deps
bazel run gazelle # regenerate build files due to any repository rule changes
```

Running the operator is as simple as having a kubeconfig defined locally
```sh
bazel run supreme-goggles # run via bazel
# or build and execute directly
bazel build supreme-goggles
./bazel-bin/supreme-goggles_/supreme-goggles
```

## Project Requirements

Copied largely from [here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/kubelet-tls-bootstrapping/#client-and-serving-certificates).

A deployment-specific approval process for kubelet serving certificates should typically only approve CSRs which:
- are requested by nodes (ensure the spec.username field is of the form system:node:<nodeName> and spec.groups contains system:nodes)
- request usages for a serving certificate (ensure spec.usages contains server auth, optionally contains digital signature and key encipherment, and contains no other usages)
- only have IP and DNS subjectAltNames that belong to the requesting node, and have no URI and Email subjectAltNames (parse the x509 Certificate Signing Request in spec.request to verify subjectAltNames)

A method of Client TLS bootstrapping which secures client credentials to each node will suffice to prove these points, which 
is out of scope here but useful.

## Process

- Kubelet uses a bootstrap token to create a CSR for client TLS certificates.
- KCM sees the signer name of the CSR is for Kubelet client cert, validates CSR properties accordingly.
- KCM approves cert. 
  - https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/controller/certificates/approver/sarapprove.go
  - sar approver uses subject access review against username of csr spec, which will be allowed for bootstrap tokens by built in rbac policies.
- KCM signs approved cert (separate approver and signer controllers).
  - https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/controller/certificates/signer/signer.go
- Kubelet sees approved cert, requests and receives it. Bootstrap token has GET/LIST CSR 
  - (actually on all CSR, that is an issue, it can read other nodes CSR even with NodeRestriction because NodeRestriction uses system:nodes and doesn't limit CSR for bootstrapping? from Ace's glance at source code)
  - Single item RBAC may help work around this, but would require incredibly tedious, dynamically generated RBAC rules at scale vs a single good webhook.
  - https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/54079 - RBAC for single object
  - https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/plugin/pkg/auth/authorizer/rbac/bootstrappolicy/policy.go
  - https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/auth/nodeidentifier/default.go#L37 - uses system:nodes prefix
  - https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/plugin/pkg/auth/authorizer/node/node_authorizer.go - no certs filtered here
  - https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/plugin/pkg/auth/authenticator/token/bootstrap/bootstrap.go#L147 bootstrap token does get authorized by name, but system-bootstrappers
  - Vanilla k8s has no way to ensure the node name of the holder of the bootstrap token matches the CSR. This can be implemented in cloud provider/host specific ways. For example, Azure offers attested VM metadata. 
  - Approval for the client CSR depends on the attested host name (submitted by client) of the requesting bootstrap token matching the requested subject for the hostname
    - In Azure this will require taking the attested data, validating and decoding the VmId, requesting the bootstrap token from a custom server which will look up the VM against ARM, ensuring both its globally unique VMID matches (since resource IDs can be recreated/squatted) and the hostname matches the client request.
  - Limiting GET/LIST CSRs to individual CSRs per bootstrap token is possible, but requires either extremely fine grained, high churn RBAC rules, or a webhook on CSRs. 
- Kubelet uses the new certs, creates a new CSR
  - https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/kubelet/certificate/kubelet.go for implementation.
  - pkg/registry/certificates/certificates/strategy.go for apiserver setting of username to node username, reliably
  - Signer appears to do some basic validation for kubelet serving certs, but does not validate username of CSR is node client cert https://cs.github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/575031b68f5d52e541de6418a59a832252244486/pkg/controller/certificates/signer/signer.go#L251
- Custom approver sees new CSR for signer name
  - If approved or failed, exit early
  - If wrong signer, exit early
  - Otherwise mostly follow upstream requirements: https://cs.github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/575031b68f5d52e541de6418a59a832252244486/pkg/apis/certificates/helpers.go#L68
  - spec.username field is of the form system:node:<nodeName> where <nodeName> is the SAN of the serving cert in the embedded request.
  - Additional validation could involve DNS lookups, similar to https://github.com/postfinance/kubelet-csr-approver/blob/481f790fad7a60dff4089f59604893fcd44af580/internal/controller/regex_ip_checks.go#L20
- KCM signer signs approved cert, kubelet receives cert, life goes on
- Enabling NodeRestriction admission controller ties this all together for higher level resources.

From this point on:
- client and server certificates rotate automatically, as long as kubelet still has a valid client cert.
- if the client cert expires, kubelet falls back to bootstrap credentials. 
- if kubelet's bootstrap credentials use an exec plugin to request a platform auth token and use that to request a short lived bootstrap token, it will be able to re-bootstrap successfully even after client cert expiry with strong guarantees.

The e2e flow guarantees:
- client CSR only receive approval when requested by a bootstrap token with matching hostname, or theselves.
- server CSR only receive approval when requested by a cert matching the requested certificate
- kubelet credentials can never expire in a meaningful way while the control plane is up.

Note there is a built-in RBAC role for the kubelet-serving approver, even though the approver itself is not built-in (only the signer): system:certificates.k8s.io:kubelet-serving-approver

Commit message:

add some more notes on join requirements

README.md, after:

# supreme-goggles

This project aims to provide a Kubernetes controller to automate approval of signing requests for Kubelet serving certificates.

For why you'd want this, see documentation here:
- https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/kubelet-tls-bootstrapping/#client-and-serving-certificates
- https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tls/managing-tls-in-a-cluster/#sign-the-certificate-signing-request
- https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/certificate-signing-requests/#approval-rejection-api-client

Client certificates for kubelet have a fully automated controller, but serving certs do not.

## Prerequisites 

This requires kubelet to run with `--rotate-server-certificates=true`, (currently not set on AKS, for example).

Setting this and restarting kubelet is relatively non disruptive -- you can even delete the serving cert entirely with minimal disruption. Test this in your environment before relying on it in production!


## Caveats

Currently there's only a basic binary build and no container image or Kubernetes manifests. If you've done this thing before, feel free to send a pull request.

There are also no tests. We could use some!


## Build + Run

We currently use bazel for builds. If you've never used bazel, try [bazelisk](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazelisk).
It has one dependency, Go.

Install Go
```sh
GOLANG_VERSION="go1.19.2"
# adjust below as appropriate for os/arch, assuming you have bash.
curl -O "https://dl.google.com/go/${GOLANG_VERSION}.linux-amd64.tar.gz"

echo "unpacking go"
# these command may require sudo!
mkdir -p /usr/local/go
chown -R "$(whoami):$(whoami)" /usr/local/go 
tar -xvf "${GOLANG_VERSION}.linux-amd64.tar.gz" -C /usr/local
rm "${GOLANG_VERSION}.linux-amd64.tar.gz"
```

Install bazelisk
```sh
go install github.com/bazelbuild/bazelisk@latest
export PATH=$PATH:$(go env GOPATH)/bin
# rename to bazel for convenience, it will invoke as bazel of an arbitrary version
mv $(go env GOPATH)/bin/bazelisk $(go env GOPATH)/bin/bazel 
```

Simple build
```sh
bazel build supreme-goggles
```

Update dependencies after development
```sh
go mod tidy
bazel run gazelle # generate build files
bazel run gazelle-update-repos # generate repository rules for go deps
bazel run gazelle # regenerate build files due to any repository rule changes
```

Running the operator is as simple as having a kubeconfig defined locally
```sh
bazel run supreme-goggles # run via bazel
# or build and execute directly
bazel build supreme-goggles
./bazel-bin/supreme-goggles_/supreme-goggles
```

## Project Requirements

Copied largely from [here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/kubelet-tls-bootstrapping/#client-and-serving-certificates).

A deployment-specific approval process for kubelet serving certificates should typically only approve CSRs which:
- are requested by nodes (ensure the spec.username field is of the form system:node:<nodeName> and spec.groups contains system:nodes)
- request usages for a serving certificate (ensure spec.usages contains server auth, optionally contains digital signature and key encipherment, and contains no other usages)
- only have IP and DNS subjectAltNames that belong to the requesting node, and have no URI and Email subjectAltNames (parse the x509 Certificate Signing Request in spec.request to verify subjectAltNames)

A method of Client TLS bootstrapping which secures client credentials to each node will suffice to prove these points, which 
is out of scope here but useful.

## Process

- Kubelet uses a bootstrap token to create a CSR for client TLS certificates.
- KCM sees the signer name of the CSR is for Kubelet client cert, validates CSR properties accordingly.
- KCM approves cert. 
  - https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/controller/certificates/approver/sarapprove.go
  - sar approver uses subject access review against username of csr spec, which will be allowed for bootstrap tokens by built in rbac policies.
- KCM signs approved cert (separate approver and signer controllers).
  - https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/controller/certificates/signer/signer.go
- Kubelet sees approved cert, requests and receives it. Bootstrap token has GET/LIST CSR 
  - (actually on all CSR, that is an issue, it can read other nodes CSR even with NodeRestriction because NodeRestriction uses system:nodes and doesn't limit CSR for bootstrapping? from Ace's glance at source code)
  - Single item RBAC may help work around this, but would require incredibly tedious, dynamically generated RBAC rules at scale vs a single good webhook.
  - https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/54079 - RBAC for single object
  - https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/plugin/pkg/auth/authorizer/rbac/bootstrappolicy/policy.go
  - https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/auth/nodeidentifier/default.go#L37 - uses system:nodes prefix
  - https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/plugin/pkg/auth/authorizer/node/node_authorizer.go - no certs filtered here
  - https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/plugin/pkg/auth/authenticator/token/bootstrap/bootstrap.go#L147 bootstrap token does get authorized by name, but system-bootstrappers
  - Vanilla k8s has no way to ensure the node name of the holder of the bootstrap token matches the CSR. This can be implemented in cloud provider/host specific ways. For example, Azure offers attested VM metadata. 
  - Approval for the client CSR depends on the attested host name (submitted by client) of the requesting bootstrap token matching the requested subject for the hostname
    - In Azure this will require taking the attested data, validating and decoding the VmId, requesting the bootstrap token from a custom server which will look up the VM against ARM, ensuring both its globally unique VMID matches (since resource IDs can be recreated/squatted) and the hostname matches the client request.
  - Limiting GET/LIST CSRs to individual CSRs per bootstrap token is possible, but requires either extremely fine grained, high churn RBAC rules, or a webhook on CSRs. 
- Kubelet uses the new certs, creates a new CSR
  - https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/kubelet/certificate/kubelet.go for implementation.
  - pkg/registry/certificates/certificates/strategy.go for apiserver setting of username to node username, reliably
  - Signer appears to do some basic validation for kubelet serving certs, but does not validate username of CSR is node client cert https://cs.github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/575031b68f5d52e541de6418a59a832252244486/pkg/controller/certificates/signer/signer.go#L251
- Custom approver sees new CSR for signer name
  - If approved or failed, exit early
  - If wrong signer, exit early
  - Otherwise mostly follow upstream requirements: https://cs.github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/575031b68f5d52e541de6418a59a832252244486/pkg/apis/certificates/helpers.go#L68
  - spec.username field is of the form system:node:<nodeName> where <nodeName> is the SAN of the serving cert in the embedded request.
  - Additional validation could involve DNS lookups, similar to https://github.com/postfinance/kubelet-csr-approver/blob/481f790fad7a60dff4089f59604893fcd44af580/internal/controller/regex_ip_checks.go#L20
- KCM signer signs approved cert, kubelet receives cert, life goes on
- Enabling NodeRestriction admission controller ties this all together for higher level resources.

From this point on:
- client and server certificates rotate automatically, as long as kubelet still has a valid client cert.
- if the client cert expires, kubelet falls back to bootstrap credentials. 
- if kubelet's bootstrap credentials use an exec plugin to request a platform auth token and use that to request a short lived bootstrap token, it will be able to re-bootstrap successfully even after client cert expiry with strong guarantees.

The e2e flow guarantees:
- client CSR only receive approval when requested by a bootstrap token with matching hostname, or theselves.
- server CSR only receive approval when requested by a cert matching the requested certificate
- kubelet credentials can never expire in a meaningful way while the control plane is up.

Note that using an exec plugin to request a bootstrap token, the only requirements are cluster fqdn and certificate authority. 

The fqdn can be injected via e.g. VMSS tags to IMDS in Azure, while the certificate authority can be in custom data or user data (later also accessible via IMDS). This eliminates the need for any other external data for bootstrap.

Note there is a built-in RBAC role for the kubelet-serving approver, even though the approver itself is not built-in (only the signer): system:certificates.k8s.io:kubelet-serving-approver
